# Unit 9: Creating your e-Portfolio (Part 3)

## Overview

In this unit, you will continue developing your e-Portfolio by adding important artifacts representing significant activities and assignments you created throughout the MA Lead program. You will reflect on your experiences creating each of those artifacts and create an outline for your leadership philosophy. Finally, you will reflect on what you have done to date (both on preparing your research project and creating your e-Portfolio), and summarize what you have learned about research.

## Topics

This unit is divided into the following topics:

> 1\. Adding Your Artifacts
> 
> 2\. Writing Your Leadership Philosophy

## Learning Outcomes

When you have completed this unit, you should be able to:

  - Create important leadership artifacts that represent your learning journey in MA Lead.

  - Reflect on the importance of the leadership artifacts.

  - Complete an outline for writing your leadership philosophy.

## Activity Checklist

Here is a checklist of learning activities you will benefit from in completing this unit. You may find it useful for planning your work.

> **Activity 9.1:** Adding leadership artifacts to your e-Portfolio
> 
> **Activity 9.2:** Start writing an outline for your leadership philosophy.
> 
> **Assessment:** Complete the Discussion Post.

## Resources

Here are the resources you will need to complete this unit.

  - Online resources will be provided in the unit.

## Topic 1: Adding Artifacts to Your e-Portfolio

In this unit you will continue to build the content of your e-Portfolio by including significant artifacts from your courses in MA Lead that are pertinent to your own leadership journey. In unit 8, you began practicing adding an artifact to your website. Now it is time to add more. One suggestion would be to include a list of all of the courses that you have taken, and will take, in MA Lead. You could provide a short reflection on each of the courses, and provide a short description and reflection on each of them. [Here](https://digitalcurations.trubox.ca/met-course-descriptions/) is an example of what this could look like. You can also continue to add artifacts after each of your MA Lead courses.

## Learning Activity 9.1: Add Artifacts and Reflect

To begin this learning activity, choose 3-5 artifacts from the MA Lead courses that are high quality, significant examples of your learning journey. Post these leadership artifacts on a page on your WordPress site to fulfill the “Leadership Story” component of your e-Portfolio.

Next, for each artifact, create a reflection that incorporates these components:

  - **DESCRIBE:** What happened when you created that activity?

  - **FEEL: **What were you thinking or feeling as you were creating or designing?

  - **EVALUATE:** What was good and bad about that activity?

  - **ANALYZE:** What else can you make of the assignment/presentation? Why went well or not so well? What kind of feedback do you have about this activity?

  - **CONCLUDE:** What conclusions can you draw? What specific (personal) conclusions do you have?

  - **PLAN:** What will you do the next time? What will you do differently, the same?

Note: Your reflections on your MA Lead artifacts can be a PowerPoint presentation, video, written assignment, audio recording, or visual representation of your thoughts. <span class="underline"> </span>

*The learning activities in this course are ungraded, unless specified. They are designed to help you succeed in your assignments in this course, so you are strongly encouraged to complete them.*

## Topic 2: Adding Your Leadership Philosophy

(Content adapted from: <https://www.calienteleadership.com/>)

A leadership philosophy is a set of beliefs and principles that strongly influences how you interpret reality and guides how you react to people, events and situations. Research has shown that consistent leadership behavior and actions require a clear personal leadership philosophy.

A written leadership philosophy also lets others know what you expect, what you value and how you will act in any given situation. This helps to make your workplace environment less stressful and more productive, as well as keeping you on track and aligned with your core beliefs and values.

By creating your own leadership philosophy and then identifying the behaviors that will help you implement these guiding principles, you will avoid the trap of deciding everything on a case-by-case basis. Understanding and being able to explicate your own leadership philosophy results in consistency of leadership behavior; a benefit for both you and those you work with.

No single leadership philosophy can be viable for everyone as a “one size fits all.” Each leader faces different circumstances, brings different backgrounds to their leadership position, and leads widely different teams of people. You must figure out what is right for you—.your philosophy is important for what it is, but it is also important within your specific context as well. Make sure you add information about that context to clarify your leadership philosophy to your audience.

## Learning Activity 9.2: Start Writing Your Leadership Philosophy

In this learning activity, you will begin writing an outline for your leadership philosophy. Post this philosophy in draft form in your e-Portfolio (you can hide the page if you want to keep it private until it is ready to share).

  - Begin by discussing your results from the Birkman assessment and what you have learned about yourself as a leader over the MA Lead program.

  - Next, discuss what you have learned about your own values and ethics. Questions like those in the following list can assist with the values discernment process. Feel free to refer back to assignments and learning activities from previous MA Lead courses such as Leadership Values and Ethics and/or Worldview Foundation of Educational Leadership), as applicable:
    
      - What is important to me?
    
      - What makes me feel fulfilled?
    
      - What make me feel angry or annoyed?
    
      - What makes my life meaningful?
    
      - What haven’t I figured out yet? (What keeps me awake at night?)
    
      - When I feel in “the flow,” what am I doing?
    
      - What makes me feel fulfilled and gets my adrenalin flowing?
    
      - What influences my decision-making process?
    
      - How do I like to be treated? How do I treat others?

  - We can also begin to clarify our values be creating a personal timeline of defining moments or seasons in our life. As we look at the individual defining moments and some of the thematic connections between them, we will be in a better position to see how our life experiences have shaped our personal values.
    
      - What pleasant and painful experiences have shaped us?
    
      - What themes, ideas, or values were reinforced across multiple defining moments?
    
      - What underlying lessons have we learned (or perhaps should have learned) through those life-shaping events?

Note: In LDRS 698 you will add to this section of your e-Portfolio by reflecting on how your leadership philosophy has changed over the course of the MA Lead program. You can decide how you want to share your leadership philosophy (e.g. a written document, audio recording, video presentation). It is entirely up to you\!

> *The learning activities in this course are ungraded, unless specified. They are designed to help you succeed in your assignments in this course, so you are strongly encouraged to complete them.*

## Summary

In this unit, you have added important artifacts to your e-Portfolio that represent significant activities and assignments you created throughout the MA Lead program. You spent time reflecting on your experiences creating each of those artifacts. You invested time writing an outline for your leadership philosophy. Finally, you reflected on what you have done to date (both on preparing your research project and creating your e-Portfolio), and summarized what you learned about research and creating an e-Portfolio.

## Assessment

Discussion Post and Response:

After completing this unit, including the learning activities, you will prepare a blog post that provides a short description of what you have done to date (both on preparing your research project and creating your e-Portfolio), and reflect upon what you are learning about research and creating an ePortfolio. 

In addition, include topic(s) and/or questions that you are wondering about or anticipate needing comments from colleagues and/or the instructor to assist you. 

Discuss the resources that have helped you progress from the start to this point. Why was it helpful or not helpful? What other resources has helped you in this process?

Please try to limit your post to 250 words and respond to a minimum of two peer posts.

## Checking your Learning

Before you move on to the next unit, you may want to check to make sure that you are able to:

  - Create important leadership artifacts that represent your learning journey in MA Lead.

  - Reflect on the importance of the leadership artifacts.

  - Complete an outline for writing your leadership philosophy.
